Silicones can be a double-edged sword when it comes to your hair.  They add shine and that slickness that allows for easier combing.  They also help retain the moisture in your hair.  They make hair look healthy and gorgeous.  After a while of using them, they can dull your hair, weigh it down, and make it look greasy.  The build-up of silicone on your hair can also cause it to become brittle with easy breakage.  What's a person to do?

First, let's talk about the different kinds of silicones.  This is the most important thing to know about silicone because there are many different types.  Not all silicones are created equal.  The first type is Air Soluble or Evaporative.  Yes, there are silicones that will simply add the benefits of silicone to your hair and then dissipate into the air leaving little or no product in your hair after a period of time.  They will allow for easy combing and all the benefit but only for a temporarily. These are great because you don't need to worry about the negative impacts of using these silicones.

The second type are Water Soluble silicones.  These will allow the benefits of the silicone to remain in your until you wash or rinse your hair thoroughly.  These silicones are great IMHO.  

The third type are Insoluble silicones, meaning they will not evaporate into the air or easily rinse out of hair.  These are the ones that can build up on your hair and cause all the negative impacts of using silicones.  Unfortunately, these are also the cheapest for manufacturers and most widely used silicones.  One of the most used silicones in this group is AMODIMETHICONE.  This silicone is touted as adhering only to damaged portions of your hair but not build up on itself. 

You can identify silicones in the ingredients by looking for any ingredient that ends in CONE or ANE.  Finding their solubility is a little more difficult.  Solubility of chemicals is calculated on a scale so it's not easy to determine which are the best silicones to use.

I color my hair, flat iron, and curl my hair so I tend to have a lot of damage.  I tried going without silicone once.  Let me tell you, that was a nightmare!  I couldn't comb my hair and I'm pretty sure I damaged it more by not using silicones.  I'm happily back on silicones and you can be to with the information that I will share with you.

First and foremost, let me tell you a little secret.  Almost all silicones can be washed out of your hair by shampooing with a non-silicone containing shampoo.  If you have a lot of silicone build-up, you may need to use a shampoo with sulfates, but not necessarily.  That's right, you can just wash most silicones out of your hair, even the Insoluble types.  Breath...why hasn't anyone told you that little tidbit of information?  I'm convinced the manufacturers try to hide the real data from consumers, but I'll save that discussion for a different article.

Amelia B.
Principal Staff Writer
The Score

